{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss Helvetica;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\pard\f0\fs24 Biology: Genetics\par
\par
1. Introduction to Genetics\par
    Definition: The study of heredity and variation of organisms.\par
    Founder: Gregor Mendel, known as the "Father of Genetics."\par
    Key Concepts:\par
        Genes: Units of heredity; segments of DNA that code for proteins.\par
        Alleles: Different versions of a gene (e.g., dominant and recessive).\par
\par
2. DNA Structure\par
    DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid): Molecule that carries genetic information.\par
    Structure: Double helix, composed of nucleotides.\par
        Nucleotide Components: Sugar (deoxyribose), phosphate group, nitrogenous base.\par
        Bases: Adenine (A), Thymine (T), Cytosine (C), Guanine (G).\par
        Base Pairing Rules: A pairs with T, C pairs with G.\par
\par
3. Mendelian Genetics\par
    Mendel's Laws:\par
        Law of Segregation: Each parent contributes one allele for a trait, which segregate during gamete formation.\par
        Law of Independent Assortment: Alleles for different traits are distributed to sex cells (& offspring) independently of one another.\par
    Punnett Squares: Tool to predict the probability of offspring traits.\par
        Genotype: Genetic makeup (e.g., BB, Bb, bb).\par
        Phenotype: Physical expression of traits (e.g., brown eyes).\par
        Homozygous: Two identical alleles (e.g., BB or bb).\par
        Heterozygous: Two different alleles (e.g., Bb).\par
\par
4. Patterns of Inheritance\par
    Dominant vs. Recessive Traits:\par
        Dominant Allele: Expressed if present (e.g., B).\par
        Recessive Allele: Expressed only if two copies are present (e.g., b).\par
    Co-dominance: Both alleles are fully expressed (e.g., blood type AB).\par
    Incomplete Dominance: Blending of traits (e.g., red flower + white flower = pink flower).\par
    Sex-linked Traits: Traits associated with genes located on sex chromosomes (e.g., hemophilia, color blindness).\par
\par
5. DNA Replication & Protein Synthesis\par
    DNA Replication: Process by which DNA makes a copy of itself.\par
        Occurs in the nucleus during the S-phase of the cell cycle.\par
        Enzymes Involved: Helicase (unzips DNA), DNA polymerase (adds nucleotides).\par
    Protein Synthesis:\par
        Transcription: DNA is transcribed into mRNA in the nucleus.\par
        Translation: mRNA is translated into amino acids at the ribosome to form proteins.\par
        Central Dogma: DNA \u8594 RNA \u8594 Protein.\par
\par
6. Genetic Mutations\par
    Definition: Changes in the nucleotide sequence of DNA.\par
    Types of Mutations:\par
        Point Mutation: Change in a single nucleotide (e.g., substitution).\par
        Frameshift Mutation: Insertion or deletion of a nucleotide, altering the reading frame.\par
        Chromosomal Mutations: Changes affecting large segments of chromosomes (e.g., duplication, deletion, inversion).\par
    Causes: Errors during DNA replication, environmental factors (e.g., radiation).\par
\par
7. Biotechnology & Genetic Engineering\par
    Genetic Engineering: Manipulation of an organism's DNA.\par
        Examples: Gene therapy, GMO crops, CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing.\par
    Cloning: Producing identical copies of DNA or entire organisms.\par
        Example: Dolly the sheep, the first mammal cloned from an adult somatic cell.\par
    DNA Fingerprinting: Technique used for identification based on unique DNA sequences.\par
\par
8. Human Genetics\par
    Karyotype: Visual representation of chromosomes in a cell; used to detect chromosomal abnormalities.\par
    Pedigree Charts: Diagrams used to track inheritance patterns across generations.\par
    Genetic Disorders:\par
        Autosomal Disorders: Cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anemia.\par
        Sex-linked Disorders: Hemophilia, Duchenne muscular dystrophy.\par
\par
9. Key Terms to Remember\par
    Haploid (n): One set of chromosomes (e.g., gametes).\par
    Diploid (2n): Two sets of chromosomes (e.g., somatic cells).\par
    Genome: The complete set of genes or genetic material in an organism.\par
    Genetic Variation: Differences in DNA sequences among individuals; important for evolution.\par
}